All problems in computer science can be solved by another level of indirection.
David John Wheeler

Flotilla is three things, a data headache manager, an interactive exploratory data viz tool and an open-source platform for rapid integrative bioinformatics development on arbitrary experiment types.

Flotilla is run through the iPython Notebook. iPython Notebooks are amazing, extremely versatile and well suited to what we do. In the past 3 years, iPython notebooks have made be a better, more organized scientist. I feel like I can work faster and iterate through more ideas. One feature that was recently released in a new version of iPython is a programmatically simple way to make new interactive tools. This is flotilla's secret sauce. Though you can't do it with the static .html version, an active flotilla session includes sliders, buttons, pull-down menus and clicky-boxes on each graph that enable easy and rapid iteration on core analyses that require no thought in how to program.

The ethic I've been trying hard to pursue is to "let the biologists do the biology."

Flotilla is meant to eliminate the barrier-to-entry for biological data science. It was built for single-cell analyses, but many of these exact same analyses (dimensionality reduction, classification) are immediately portable to non-single-cell datasets with lots of samples. Flotilla facilitates data science organization and sharing. Flotilla can serve as a platform to disseminate user data. Flotilla requires at least 2 input files at the moment: a gene expression table and a metadata table (it can also handle a splicing table). Once these are in hand it takes less than 10 minutes to make a new flotilla project and ship that to someone who wants to interact with the data. The code is entirely separate from the data so as flotilla grows, virtually no effort will be required to analyze old data with new tools.

The first goal of flotilla is to enable rapid integration of multiple datasets across multiple platforms. Having worked on 3 different supercomputing clusters and 3 laptops with dozens of collaborators over the years, I've learned that handing data between computers/people/labs is almost always messy; without care this problem is exponentiated when a person tries to manage many projects. Organization is hard. Flotilla manages where data is stored and how it is delivered.  A single command is required to load data for all relevant experiments of a given project. New data, created with flotilla interactions are stored in project-specific directories. Changes within a project are tracked by version control. Thus, collaborators can use version control to synchronize their analysis to enable better, more consistent and reproducible science and sharing.

My observation from the last 8 years of working with HTS data is that a huge portion of a bioinformagician's time is spent with boilerplate re-analysis of the same data, with slightly different parameter sets. For example, I'll be asked to use different gene lists, use different subsets of samples, drop an outlier and do it again, what genes have greater that 2-fold change, what genes are significant at p < 0.05, 0.01, 0.001... all questions which, while important for projects, probably do not require the level of skill you and I possess to answer. I believe that there should be tools that empower scientists with little to zero CS background to answer these questions, to test their hypotheses and generate new ones, without adding the overhead of learning how to write a programming language or learn UNIX and without depending on an expert.

This brings me to the third goal of flotilla: rapid and extensible bioinformatics development. Biologists are cool, but I also care about the bioinformagicians and see the task that's before them. Flotilla is modular and agnostic to the upstream tools that build the data we use. We have designed flotilla with growth in mind. Now we have data-types for RNA-seq. Now the task before me is to port more of my old tools as flotilla data types. Data types will correspond to a biological experiment and object-oriented inheritance magic will make it really easy to add new tools and variants of experiments by extending existing data types.

